We don’t know anything
about Habakkuk’s parents.
about his circumstances in life or his death.
We don’t know anything about Habakkuk,
but what we do know is that he lived
during a most stressful time
during the nation of Israel’s history.
The year was 628 B.C.E.
Wicked King Jehoiakim was ruling,
the son of Josiah.
That would be about 20 years
before 607 B.C.E.
And verse 2 describes the conditions
that Habakkuk and Jeremiah
and others had to face.
Verse 2 says:
“How long, O Jehovah,
must I cry for help, but you do not hear?
How long must I ask for help from violence,
but you do not intervene?”
How stressful
this must have been to Habakkuk!
Jerusalem was no city of peace,
rather, a city of violence and bloodshed.
Verse 4 says:
“The wicked surround the righteous.”
The prophet Urijah had to run away
because of the wickedness; he was afraid.
He went down to Egypt.
Jehoiakim drags him
back to Jerusalem and kills him.
And then Jehoiakim hated Jeremiah,
had seething hatred for that prophet.
It was a scary time to live in Jerusalem,
and Habakkuk had to do that.
No wonder—no wonder he poured out
his heart to Jehovah:
‘Why, Jehovah—why?
Why don’t you do something?
‘Jerusalem—this is the city you chose;
‘your temple is here;
you had this temple built;
‘the Davidic king is on the throne.
‘This is your city, Jehovah.
Why don’t you do something?’
And Jehovah said,
‘Habakkuk, I am doing something
—I am doing something.’
And He now goes on
to show what He is doing.
Yes, it is wicked times there.
But He shows now in verses 5 and 6
(even as Brother Thomas had said)
that the Babylonians are coming
—the Chaldeans are coming—
and they’re going to punish
unfaithful Israelites, unfaithful ones.
And then in chapter 2,
Jehovah shows Habakkuk
that Babylon itself
will not escape punishment
and that it will be conquered
by the Medes and the Persians
in 539 B.C.E.
So amid all of those problems,
‘Habakkuk, I have my eye on you
[Jehovah is saying]
‘and on Jeremiah and Daniel and Ezekiel.
‘These faithful ones
—they’re not going to be lost in the crowd.
‘I’ll take care of you.
However, in the meantime,
be faithful and be patient.’
And now in chapter 1
—in fact, in chapter 2, verse 3—
Jehovah shows and He explains to Habakkuk
exactly what He is doing as well
(chapter 2 and verse 3).
“The vision is yet for its appointed time,
“and it is rushing toward its end,
and it will not lie.
Even if it should delay, . . . ”
‘You see, the vision
—the destruction of Jerusalem—
‘it is rushing toward its end.
‘It’s eagerly moving forward
toward its fulfillment, Habakkuk.
And even if it should delay, you be careful.’
In the imperfect mind, it might delay.
Maybe Habakkuk and others thought:
‘Well, didn’t Isaiah say that Babylon
was going to destroy Jerusalem?
That was 100 years ago.’
It hadn’t happened yet.
But it might delay in one’s mind.
However, what does Jehovah say
there in verse 3?
The last sentence: “It will not be late!”
‘Habakkuk, it will not be late!’
And in 20 years (20 years later),
in 607 B.C.E., Jerusalem was destroyed.
So any delay
was a perceived delay due to imperfection.
607 B.C.E.—oh, it’s easy for us.
We look back in history—
We look back,
and we say from our standpoint:
“607 B.C.E., of course it was 607 B.C.E.
“That was a crucial date in Bible prophecy.
“607 B.C.E. is linked
to the birth of God’s Kingdom in 1914.
607 B.C.E.
is the beginning of the Gentile Times.”
We get it!
But Habakkuk, Jeremiah, and others
did not have the luxury
of looking back retrospectively and saying,
“It’s going to be in 607 B.C.E.”
No, Jehovah just said to them:
“It will not be late!”
‘Your job, your work
—be faithful and be patient.
I am doing something.’
That’s what he’s telling Habakkuk.
The same with us today.
Armageddon—it’s fixed; it’s predetermined.
The hour, the day—it’s coming.
“It will not be late!”
What do we do?
Be patient and be faithful.
We trust in Jehovah.
Now, in verse 4,
Jehovah gives Habakkuk
tremendous encouragement
—and encouragement
that is so practical for you and me today.
The last portion of verse 4.
Let’s read that, please.
“But the righteous one [that’s Habakkuk]
will live by his faithfulness.”
“The righteous one”—that’s you and me.
We are trying to be righteous.
We want to hold to Jehovah’s standards.
We love Jehovah.
But now Jehovah says,
‘Just live by faithfulness;
live by faithfulness.’
What does that mean?
That statement
is more important than ever before.
“Faith is the assured expectation”
that the things
that Jehovah says will come true
and the confidence and the conviction
that everything Jehovah says
is going to be
in our best interests—faithful.
But we need to be faithful
more than ever before
because look at how Jehovah
has allowed wickedness
to increase, proliferate.
It is so wicked today
—the websites that one can stumble onto,
the wicked websites
that can take one’s spirituality away.
The more that Jehovah
allows wickedness, violence, and so forth
to proliferate on the earth,
that’s more of a test of our love for him.
How deep is our devotion to Jehovah?
How much do we love him?
What is in our hearts?
It causes us to take a stand.
So being faithful
is not simply a mental  acknowledgment
that ‘I’m one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.’
No, rather, being faithful
means complete trust in Jehovah’s promises
and being firmly convinced
that whatever Jehovah asks us to do
is in our best interests
—complete trust in Jehovah’s promises
and being firmly convinced,
having this conviction
and being firmly persuaded,
that whatever Jehovah asks us to do
is in our best interests.
This point is so powerful that Paul quoted it
three times in the Greek Scriptures.
“Faith”—over 500 times it’s in the Bible
(we could go on and on);
that’s how important this word “faith” is.
So that’s what Jehovah
now is telling Habakkuk.
But, now, chapter 3 and verse 2,
how does one build confidence?
How does one build faith?
Chapter 3 and verse 2:
“O Jehovah, I have heard
the report about you.”
This is what Habakkuk did:
He meditated on Jehovah
and the reports about Him.
What reports?
Oh, the Red Sea, Jericho,
185,000 Assyrians killed in Hezekiah’s day
—these were reports Habakkuk meditated on,
and it built his confidence in Jehovah.
And he says:
“I am in awe, O Jehovah, of your activity.”
Jehovah’s activity is fear-inspiring.
That’s what it does for us too
when we meditate on all that Jehovah
has done for his people today,
the fulfillment of prophecies.
No wonder Habakkuk said:
“In the midst of the years bring it to life!”
‘Bring it back, dear Father, bring it back.
‘I am confident you will revive your activity
in behalf of faithful ones.’
And that’s, again, our prayer.
In spite of the difficult conditions
Habakkuk lived in and had to face,
after meditating on Jehovah’s activity,
Habakkuk was moved to utter what may be
one of the most memorable
expressions ever expressed
—an expression of confidence—
by a human.
And that’s in verse 18 of chapter 3:
“Yet, as for me, I will exult in Jehovah;
I will be joyful in the God of my salvation,”
in spite of the challenges.
This means, literally, “jump for joy.”
‘I’m going to spin around.
‘I’m going to spin around in my love for you
and joy for you, my delight in God.’
What a beautiful expression of confidence
that Habakkuk had!
Habakkuk disappears from the account,
but his message remains.
And that message is loud and clear
for you and me today: Trust in Jehovah.
And when we do that with our acts of worship
—each time we trust in Jehovah
and show him how much we love him
in spite of our problems—
Jehovah’s heart rejoices
and he loves our worship.
So in confidence, let us trust in Jehovah,
like Habakkuk,
and pour out our anxieties
and concerns to our heavenly Father.
Pay attention to prophecy:
“It will not be late!”
And above all, let’s be patient;
let’s be faithful
as we wait on our God of salvation.